---
id: cwooze5xnzrd95qs52k1g48
title: Church History
desc: ''
updated: 1674316290690
created: 1654223767390
currentStep: 0
totalSteps: 0
---

## Christianity and Cities : Alexandria and Antioch

* Rather than in remote rural areas, early Christianity was well established primarily in the Greek-speaking port 
cities  including Ephesus and Pergamon 


* As Christianity became deeply established in these cities, one of the significant things developed
 was the position of a “metropolitan bishop” – 
that is, a bishop who was seen as the titular leader of all the churches 
in a city, rather than of one specific Christian community

	The most important of these were the bishops of :
	* Alexandria, 
	* Antioch, 
	* Constantinople, 
	* Jerusalem, and 
	* Rome.

* Among the various hellenistic cities, two became known as intellectual cities by the middle 4th century, Alexendria  and Antioch

* There are 2 distinctions between these 2 cities in relation to Christian Faith
	* Preferred way of interpreting the Bible
		- Alexandria preferred the use of alogorical exegesis
		- Antioch preferred literal or historical approach

	* Christological Understanding
	  NB: both agreed that Christ was both Human and Divine
		* The Alexandrian believed that, if human nature is to be deified, it must be united 
		  with the divine nature. God must therefore become united with human nature in such a 
		  manner that the latter is enabled to share in the life of God.
		
		* Antiochene theologians tended to place their emphasis at a different point. 
		  If redemption is to take place, it must be on the basis of a new obedience on the part of humanity. 
		  In that humanity is unable to break free from the bonds of sin, God is obliged to intervene. 
		  This leads to the coming of the redeemer as one who unites humanity and divinity, and 
		  thus to the reestablishment of an obedient people of God



Monasticism: A Reaction against the Cities

- The growth of Christianity in the cities of the Roman Empire was seen by many 
Christians as a positive development whiles others saw it as a bad thing.
	The Good:
	* the Christian faith had increasing influence; 
	* it was a means by which Christianity could begin to work to transform urban culture and society

	The Bad
	* that the reverse of the above might happen

- One of the most important developments to take place within early Christianity out of this sceptism was monasticism.
	* The terms “monk” and “monasticism” both come from the Greek word monachos, meaning “solitary” or “alone.”)
	* Many Christians began to make their homes in secluded regions,

	There are 2 ways Monasticism was practised:
		* Seclusion in terms of a solitary and ascetic life - referred to as “eremitic”
		* Seclusion in communal terms (“cenobitic” monasticism) 
			- this gained traction by the 5th century
		  	- many Monasteries were built as a result of the cenobitic monasticism




The Cult of Thecla: Women and the Churches - Roles of women with regards to the Church

- As noted earlier, women played an important role in the apostolic church (1.1.6). Yet, 
for reasons that are not fully understood, the churches began to adopt more traditional, 
culturally accommodated approaches to headship and hierarchy.

- Eventually women were not given position of communal and litergical leadership

- There were three orders of ministry within the early church: 
	* bishops, 
	* priests, and 
	* deacons

	- Although women usually found themselves excluded from the former two roles, they remained active as deaconesses

	- later, The Council of Chalcedon (451) ruled that women should not be allowed to be ordained as deaconesses until they were 
	  forty


- Women played leading roles in areas of Martydom. 
	- Two of the most celebrated women martyrs of the early church in the west were Perpetua and Felicitas,
		* they were martyred together in Carthage in the 1st decade of the 3rd century

	- also there was Thelca. Thecla was a traditional “stay at home” aristocrat. 
	  	* she overheard the preaching of the apostle Paul. 
	  	* Enthralled by what she heard, left behind her fiancé and her home to follow Paul, and 
		* eventually travel and proclaim the gospel herself
		* she was condemned to death by the Roman authorities but eventually prevailed
		* she was even prepared to dress as a man in order to carry out the gospel


- The Montanist movement (which operated outside the church administrative structure) of the mid-second century, for example, centered 
on three charismatic individuals – Montanus himself, and 
two women colleagues: Prisca (sometimes called Priscilla) and Maximilla. Montanism is 
perhaps best understood as a religious renewal movement, similar in some ways to modern 
Pentecostalism. Contemporary sources suggest that Prisca and Maximilla achieved greater 
status than Montanus himself amongst the movement’s followers.

- so, even though women were not given leadership roles in the church, they played significant roles outside
  the mainstream church life




