
## Heresy: Waldensians, Hussites, and Wycliffites
The Council of Constance, aimed to resolve the Western Schism but also dealt with other issues related to church reform and doctrine which the church actually branded as heresies.

**John Wycliffe**

One of these issues was the challenge posed by John Wycliffe.
- John Wycliffe, was an english theologian and church reformer who lived in the 14th century.
- He is known for translating the Bible into English from Latin.
- He believed that people should be able to read and understand the Bible for themselves, without depending on the clergy who often abused their power and wealth.
- He also challenged some of the doctrines and practices of the church, such as papal authority, indulgences, and transubstantiation.
- He was considered a heretic by the church and by the Council of Constance.
- His followers were called Lollards and they faced persecution for spreading his teachings. Wycliffe's translation of the Bible influenced later reformers such as Jan Hus and Martin Luther.

**Jan Hus**
- Jan Hus was a Bohemian preacher, scholar, and a reformer.
- He criticized some of the practices and teachings of the church.
- Hus advocated for a more personal and spiritual approach to Christianity
- He advocated for a Bible first approach rather than papal tradition and authority.
- He also supported the use of vernacular languages in worship and education, rather than Latin.

Hus was seen as a threat by the church and also some secular rulers who feared losing their power and influence.

Hus was summoned to appear before the Council of Constance.
He was arrested and imprisoned upon his arrival at the council.
He was tried and condemned for heresy and was burn at the stake as a heretic.

Hus' death sparked a revolt in Bohemia known as the Hussite Wars (1419-1436) which fought against many crusaders sent by various popes to suppress them.

**Waldensians by Valdes**
There was also another group that emerged earlier, in the 12th century, as a reform movement called the Waldensians.
- The movement was inspired by a french merchant named Valdes who decided to follow a simple and poor lifestyle based on the litteral reading of the Bible.
- They also preached in the common language of the people instead of Latin.
- The movement was seen as a threat by the church authorities who wanted to maintain their power and status over society.
- The Waldensians were persecuted and excommunicated by the church for their dissenting views and practices.


Although many of the movements that were labelled heretic by the church were biblical reformative movements, there were some that were only modifiction of older heresies.

- One of such heresies were provided by a group called the Cathars.
- The Cathars had a Gnostic worldview -
- they believed that matter is intrinsically evil, and also that there is a conflict between an inferior creating divinity and a superior redeeming divinity

Gnosticism can basically be categorized under the believe in a dualism - a conflict between good and evil, spirit and matter, and two different gods.


Summary: 
- How the church in the middle ages viewed heresy
- How the branded ple like Valdes, Wycliffe, and Jan Hus as heretics
