## The Risorgimento: Italian Reunification and the Pope

 Summary
- This section is about the impact of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars on the Papal States, which were territories under the direct rule of the pope in central Italy. This Section mentions some of the events that led to the loss of papal authority and territory, like the annexation of Avignon in 1791 and the creation of the Roman Republic by French troops in 1798. The text also briefly refers to the the restoration of the Papal States to the pope (at the Congress of Vienna) after Napoleon's defeat.


The Napoleonic wars sparked nationalism in Europe. Because of this, Spain and Portugal adopted liberal constitutions in 1812 and 1822, moving away from absolute monarchy. Many Italians also wanted to free themselves from Austria and unite under a liberal regime. However, a rebellion in Piedmont (in Italy) in 1821 failed to achieve this goal.



The Catholic church became involved and opposed to the nationalist movement know as the Risorgimento, that unified Italy in the 19th century. The popes resisted the loss of their temporal power over the Papal States and denounced the liberal and democratic ideas of the nationalists. Some of these popes were :
    * Gregory XVI, pope from 1831 to 1846 and
    * Pius IX, who was initially seen and welcomed as an ally by many as a reformer
    
Also some of the key leaders of the Risorgimento were:
    * Giuseppe Garibaldi (1807–82) and 
    * Giuseppe Mazzini (1805–72) 


Pius IX fled Rome after a republic was declared in 1849. He lost his lands and popularity, but regained his power with the help of the French. 

Victor Emmanuel II, king of Sardinia, an ally to the Risorgimento, defeated the popal forces in 1860 and unified Italy with the help of Garibaldi and the Franco-Prussian War. He moved to Rome and allowed religious freedom but no special status for Catholicism.

Pius IX became isolated and powerless in the Vatican after Italy's unification. Having lost his lands and influence, Pius IX called the First Vatican Council in 1869 to reaffirm the Catholic church's authority against a hostile culture.

The events of the Risorgimento ended with the capture of Rome and the creation of the Kingdom of Italy in 1870.




