

-  the vocabulary and the developed trinitarian concepts by Christian theologians about God are not explicitly stated in the New Testament. 
- this has led some radical Christian writers of the sixteenth century argued
that concept isn't a biblical idea.
- Someone like Michael Servetus develops this line of argument in his work - On the Errors of the Trinity (1531)
- It makes it important therefore to trace the doctrine and its development to the early church.

**The emergence of the trinitarian vocabulary**
- The vocabulary related to the doctrine of the Trinity is difficulty for students. 
- For instance “three persons, one substance” is not an easy phrase to grasp. 
- Yet, understanding how the terms emerged could be the most potent approach to appreciating their meaning
- Tertullian is believed to be responsible for the development of the distinctive trinitarian terminology (c.160–c.225). 
- According to one analysis, he coined 509 new nouns, 284 new adjectives, and 161 new verbs in the Latin language.

- There are 3 Trinitarian terms coinded by Tertullian we will consider

**Trinitas**
- The word “Trinity” (Trinitas) was invented by Tertullian, and has become normative within the church.

**Persona**
- Tertullian introduced the term 'Persona' to translate the Greek word hypostasis.
- Scholars have debated over what Tertullian meant by this Latin term, which is translated as “person”
- The term persona literally means “a mask,” such as that worn by an actor in a Roman drama.
- The term persona thus came to mean, something like “the role that someone is playing.” 
- It is therefore possible that Tertullian's understaning of “one substance, three persons” meant that the one God played three distinct yet related roles in the great drama of human redemption.
- The complexity of the process of creation and redemption did not imply that there were many gods; simply that there was one God, who acted in a multiplicity of manners within the “economy of salvation”

**Substantia**
The term Substantia i.e. "Substance" once again was introduced by Tertullian which expresses the idea of a fundamental unity
within the Godhead, despite the inherent complexity of the revelation of God within history. “Substance” is what the three persons of the Trinity have in common. It must not be thought of as something which exists independently of the three persons; rather, it expresses their common foundational unity, despite their outward appearance of diversity.