### MODELS OF SALVATION IN CHRIST: CLASSICAL AND CONTEMPORARY
## Understanding the Complexity of Salvation

**Introduction**

- So we have seen how the concept of "salvation" is quite complex, theologically. (And by theologically I mean the critical study and reasoning of salvation in light of the word and tradition).
- Now this isn't a bad thing because what Theology aims at is to to critically analyze various elements or components of salvation for better perspective and understanding.

**Historical and Situational Context**

- Different aspects of salvation have been emphasized in various periods of church history.
- and these aspects often align with specific historical or situational needs.

**Contextualization in Christian Mission**

- Recent studies have highlight the importance of contextualizing the Christian gospel with a receptor-orientation approach.

**Receptor-Oriented Gospel**

- Now the receptor-orientation approach basically means the gospel message varying based on who is listening or the needs of the audience's. For example:
  - **Liberation**: For the oppressed (spiritually or politically), the gospel message is to be preached as a liberation gospel. and
  - **Forgiveness and Pardon**: For those burdened by personal guilt, forgiveness and pardon.

**Avoiding a Truncated Gospel**

- But Emphasizing only one model or an aspect of salvation can lead to a myopic understanding of the gospel.

**Exploring Components of Salvation**

- So, We will now explore various components of salvation which have particular relevance in different situations.

**Paul’s Letters and Soteriological Terms**

- Our exploration will begin with key soteriological terms or what the book notes as images from Paul’s letters.
- But before we do that, it is important to note that Paul almost always addresses what has been achieved for believers through the death of Christ when dealing with the issues at stake

### Pauline Perspectives on Salvation

**Key Images Used by Paul**

1. **Adoption**

   - According to Paul, Christians are "adopted" into God's family (Romans 8:15, 23; Galatians 4:5), which
   - reflects a Greco-Roman legal practice and not even a traditional Jewish law.
   - Also according to F. F. Bruce's interpretation of Paul's use of adoption, believers share inheritance rights as Jesus Christ, and will receive glory after sharing in his sufferings.

2. **Justification**

   - Again, according Paul, believers are "justified through faith" (Romans 5:1-2),
   - indicating a change in legal status before God, assuring acquittal despite their sinfulness.
   - The term thus signifies entering a right relationship with God or being made righteous.
   <!-- - The Reformation debated the meaning of justification. -->

3. **Redemption**

   - Means "securing someone's release through payment."
   - In ancient times, it referred to liberating prisoners of war or freeing those in slavery.
   - The idea here is that Christ's death secures believers' freedom from the law or death, making them slaves of God (1 Corinthians 6:20, 7:23).

4. **Salvation**
   - A rich term with various images and associations in paul's writings.
   - the basic understanding is deliverance from danger, captivity, or fatal illness which
   - encompasses notions of healing and liberation.
   - Finally, Salvation has past (Romans 8:24), present (1 Corinthians 1:18), and future (Romans 13:11) dimensions, with eschatological understanding.
